docs:add docs for StorageVersionMigration v1alpha1 (#45294)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/storage-version-migration.md

Reviewer: Is this:
- a task, that someone can follow to migrate actual objects in their cluster
- a tutorial, to help someone learn how storage version migration works

Author: The current doc reflects two of the use cases of storage version migration that user can use it for. But they can migrate any actual k8s objects using this.

Author: Please let me know if you think there can be a better place to host this. I used by best judgement.

Reviewer: Given that this page covers two different use cases, I think http://k8s.io/docs/tutorials/ is the right home.

Reviewer: (we can merge this as a task and then move it in a follow-up PR)

Reviewer 2: I was considering moving this to tutorials since I am forking this branch anyway - but I'm unsure about the directory it would go under in tutorials. I will take your advice and leave it up to @nilekhc to decide with y'all in a follow-up PR.

---
title: Migrate Kubernetes objects using Storage Version Migration
content_type: task
weight: 60
---

> <!-- overview -->

Reviewer 3: +1

> <!-- overview -->

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#feature-state for the explanation of that shortcode.

Kubernetes relies on resource data being actively re-written to perform certain 
maintenance activities related to at rest storage. Two prominent examples are 
the versioned schema of stored resources (i.e. the preferred storage schema 
changing from v1 to v2 for a given resource) and encryption at rest
(i.e. rewriting stale data based on a change in how the data should be encrypted).

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

Install [`kubectl`](/docs/tasks/tools/).

> {{< include "task-tutorial-prereqs.md" >}} {{< version-check >}}

Author: Is there any example I can refer?

> {{< include "task-tutorial-prereqs.md" >}} {{< version-check >}}

Reviewer: Yep, have a look at https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/cdf5f375d92e0c16d0c8a1a4661ba843d99f43e2/content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/topology-manager.md?plain=1#L12

schema conversion between them. Before setting v2 as the preferred storage schema
version, it's important to ensure that all existing CRs stored as v1 are migrated to v2.
This migration can be achieved through _Storage Version Migration_ to migrate all CRs from v1 to v2.

- Create the CRD resource file with the name `test-crd.yaml` as follows:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
  kind: CustomResourceDefinition
  metadata:
    name: testcrds.stable.example.com
  spec:
    group: stable.example.com
    names:
      plural: testcrds
      singular: testcrd
      kind: testcrd
      listKind: testcrdList
    scope: Namespaced
    versions:
    - name: v1
      served: true
      storage: true
      schema:
        openAPIV3Schema:
          type: object
          properties:
            hostPort:
              type: string
    conversion:
      strategy: Webhook
      webhook:
        clientConfig:
          url: https://127.0.0.1:9443/crdconvert
          caBundle: <CABundle info>
      conversionReviewVersions:
      - v1
      - v2
  ```
  Create CRD using kubectl
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f test-crd.yaml
  ```

> - Create Custom Resource (CR) resource file with name `cr1.yaml` as follows:

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
- Create a manifest for an example testcrd. Name the manifest `cr1.yaml` and use these contents:
```

IMO, it's even better to use an plausible but obviously example API kind like FruitClaim or RoomTemperature or SelfieRequest.

---
title: Migrate Kubernetes Objects Using Storage Version Migration

reviewers:
  - deads2k
  - jpbetz
  - enj
  - nilekhc

content_type: task
min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.30
weight: 60
---

<!-- overview -->

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.30" state="alpha" >}}

Reviewer 4: Improvement for `{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.30" state="alpha" >}}`, consider using the new `feature_gate_name` option, making the feature state more data-driven.

```suggestion
{{< feature-state feature_gate_name="StorageVersionMigration" >}}
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion @dipesh-rawat. I updated it. PTAL.

Kubernetes relies on API data being actively re-written, to support some 
maintenance activities related to at rest storage. Two prominent examples are 
the versioned schema of stored resources (that is, the preferred storage schema 
changing from v1 to v2 for a given resource) and encryption at rest
(that is, rewriting stale data based on a change in how the data should be encrypted).

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

Install [`kubectl`](/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl).

{{< include "task-tutorial-prereqs.md" >}} {{< version-check >}}

<!-- steps -->

> ## Re-encrypt Kubernetes secrets using storage version migration

Reviewer: What's the link between storage version migration and re-encryption? Are we sure that readers can get that link?

> - To begin with, [configure KMS provider](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kms-provider/) 

Reviewer: (yes, but for alpha we're OK with this quality level)

to encrypt data at rest in etcd using following encryption configuration.
  ```yaml
  kind: EncryptionConfiguration
  apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1
  resources:
  - resources:
    - secrets

>       providers:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    providers:
```
As suggested by @drewhagen and https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/config-api/apiserver-encryption.v1/

    - aescbc:
      keys:
      - name: key1
        secret: c2VjcmV0IGlzIHNlY3VyZQ==
  ```
  Make sure to enable automatic reload of encryption
configuration file by setting `--encryption-provider-config-automatic-reload` to true.
- Create a Secret using kubectl.
  ```shell
  kubectl create secret generic my-secret --from-literal=key1=supersecre
  ```
- [Verify](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kms-provider/#verifying-that-the-data-is-encrypted)
  the serialized data for that Secret object is prefixed with `k8s:enc:aescbc:v1:key1`.
- Update the encryption configuration file as follows to rotate the encryption key.
  ```yaml
  kind: EncryptionConfiguration
  apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1
  resources:
  - resources:
    - secrets
      providers:
    - aescbc:
      keys:
      - name: key2
        secret: c2VjcmV0IGlzIHNlY3VyZSwgaXMgaXQ/
    - aescbc:
      keys:
      - name: key1
        secret: c2VjcmV0IGlzIHNlY3VyZQ==
  ```

> - To ensure that previously created secret `my-secert` is re-encrypted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To ensure that previously created Secret `my-secret` is re-encrypted
```

with new key `key2`, you will use _Storage Version Migration_.

> - Create `StorageVersionMigration` resource file with the name `migrate-secret.yaml`
> as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a StorageVersionMigration manifest named `migrate-secret.yaml` as follows:
```

  ```yaml
  kind: StorageVersionMigration
  apiVersion: storagemigration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
  metadata:
    name: secrets-migration
  spec:
    resource:
      group: ""
      version: v1
      resource: secrets
  ```
  Create the resource using _kubectl_ as follows:
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f migrate-secret.yaml
  ```

> - Monitor migration of Secrets using status. Successful migration should have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor migration of Secrets by checking the `.status` of the StorageVersionMigration.
  A successful migration should have its
```

> _Succeeded_ condition set to _true_ in the status field. Get the migration resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `Succeeded` condition set to true. Get the StorageVersionMigration object
```

as follows:
  ```shell
  kubectl get storageversionmigration.storagemigration.k8s.io/secrets-migration -o yaml
  ```

>   This will produce an output similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  The output is similar to:
```

      reason: StorageVersionMigrationInProgress
    - type: Succeeded
      status: 'True'
      lastUpdateTime: '2024-03-12T20:29:46Z'
      reason: StorageVersionMigrationSucceeded
    resourceVersion: '84'
  ```
- [Verify](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kms-provider/#verifying-that-the-data-is-encrypted)
  the stored secret is now prefixed with `k8s:enc:aescbc:v1:key2`.

## Update the preferred storage schema of the resource while moving from _v1_ to _v2_
Consider a scenario where a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}}
(CRD) is created to serve custom resources (CRs) and is set as the preferred storage schema. When it's time
to introduce v2 of the CRD, it can be added for serving only with a conversion
webhook. This enables a smoother transition where users can create CRs using
either the v1 or v2 schema, with the webhook in place to perform the necessary
schema conversion between them. Before setting v2 as the preferred storage schema
version, it's important to ensure that all existing CRs stored as v1 are migrated to v2.
This migration can be achieved through _Storage Version Migration_ to migrate all CRs from v1 to v2.

> - Create a manifest for the CRD, named `test-crd.yaml`, as follows:

Reviewer: We could make this a downloadable manifest; see `code_sample` in https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#source-code-files

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
  kind: CustomResourceDefinition
  metadata:
    name: selfierequests.stable.example.com
  spec:
    group: stable.example.com
    names:
      plural: SelfieRequests
      singular: SelfieRequest
      kind: SelfieRequest
      listKind: SelfieRequestList
    scope: Namespaced
    versions:
    - name: v1
      served: true
      storage: true
      schema:
        openAPIV3Schema:
          type: object
          properties:
            hostPort:
              type: string
    conversion:
      strategy: Webhook
      webhook:
        clientConfig:
          url: https://127.0.0.1:9443/crdconvert
          caBundle: <CABundle info>
      conversionReviewVersions:
      - v1
      - v2
  ```
  Create CRD using kubectl
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f test-crd.yaml
  ```
- Create a manifest for an example testcrd. Name the manifest `cr1.yaml` and use these contents:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: stable.example.com/v1
  kind: SelfieRequest
  metadata:
    name: cr1
    namespace: default
  ```
  Create CR using kubectl
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f cr1.yaml
  ```

> - Verify that CR is written and stored as v1 by getting the object from etcd.

Reviewer: Where do you run this? Anywhere, or perhaps specifically on the host where etcd is running?

For clusters that run etcd inside containers, maybe you want to get a shell into that container first?

  ```shell
  ETCDCTL_API=3 etcdctl get /kubernetes.io/stable.example.com/testcrds/default/cr1 [...] | hexdump -C
  ```
  where [...] contains the additional arguments for connecting to the etcd server.
- Update the CRD `test-crd.yaml` to include v2 version for serving and storage
 and v1 as serving only, as follows:

>   ```yaml

Reviewer: (nit / OK to skip for alpha)

We can use a `highlight` shortcode to make the changes more obvious; see https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/#cleanup-all-secrets-encrypted for an example of what this looks like.

            type: object
            properties:
              host:
                type: string
              port:
                type: string
      - name: v1
        served: true
        storage: false
        schema:
          openAPIV3Schema:
            type: object
            properties:
              hostPort:
                type: string
    conversion:
      strategy: Webhook
      webhook:
        clientConfig:
          url: 'https://127.0.0.1:9443/crdconvert'
          caBundle: <CABundle info>
        conversionReviewVersions:
          - v1
          - v2
  ```
  Update CRD using kubectl
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f test-crd.yaml
  ```
- Create CR resource file with name `cr2.yaml` as follows:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: stable.example.com/v2
  kind: SelfieRequest
  metadata:
    name: cr2
    namespace: default
  ```
- Create CR using kubectl
  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f cr2.yaml
  ```
- Verify that CR is written and stored as v2 by getting the object from etcd.
  ```shell
  ETCDCTL_API=3 etcdctl get /kubernetes.io/stable.example.com/testcrds/default/cr2 [...] | hexdump -C
  ```
  where [...] contains the additional arguments for connecting to the etcd server.

> - Create `StorageVersionMigration` resource file with the name `migrate-crd.yaml`
> as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a StorageVersionMigration manifest named `migrate-crd.yaml`, with the contents as follows:
```

We could make this a downloadable manifest; see `code_sample` in https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#source-code-files

  ```yaml
  kind: StorageVersionMigration
  apiVersion: storagemigration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
  metadata:

>   name: crdsvm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    name: crdsvm
```
I'd call it migrate-selfierequest-v2 (sic) though.

  spec:
    resource:
      group: stable.example.com
      version: v1
      resource: SelfieRequest
  ```

>   Create the resource using _kubectl_ as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Create the object using _kubectl_ as follows:
```
We know that this resource is also an object (it has `.metadata`, `.spec` and `.status`)

  ```shell
  kubectl apply -f migrate-crd.yaml
  ```
- Monitor migration of secrets using status. Successful migration should have
  _Succeeded_ condition set to _true_ in the status field. Get the migration resource
  as follows:
  ```shell
  kubectl get storageversionmigration.storagemigration.k8s.io/crdsvm -o yaml
  ```

>   This will produce an output similar to:

Reviewer 2: Consistent with Tim's feedback above:
```suggestion
   The output is similar to:
```

Reviewer: (watch out for the extra leading space there @drewhagen)
